@node Development Tools
@appendix Development Tools

Here are some tools that you might find useful while developing code.

@menu
* Tags::
* cscope::
* Version Control::
* Virtual Machine::
@end menu

@node Tags
@section Tags

Tags are an index to the functions and global variables declared in a
program.  Many editors, including Emacs and @command{vi}, can use
them.  The @file{Makefile} in @file{pintos/src} produces Emacs-style
tags with the command @code{make TAGS} or @command{vi}-style tags with
@code{make tags}.

In Emacs, use @kbd{M-.} to follow a tag in the current window,
@kbd{C-x 4 .} in a new window, or @kbd{C-x 5 .} in a new frame.  If
your cursor is on a symbol name for any of those commands, it becomes
the default target.  If a tag name has multiple definitions, @kbd{M-0
M-.} jumps to the next one.  To jump back to where you were before
you followed the last tag, use @kbd{M-*}.

@node cscope
@section cscope

The @command{cscope} program also provides an index to functions and
variables declared in a program.  It has some features that tag
facilities lack.  Most notably, it can find all the points in a
program at which a given function is called.

The @file{Makefile} in @file{pintos/src} produces @command{cscope}
indexes when it is invoked as @code{make cscope}.  Once the index has
been generated, run @command{cscope} from a shell command line; no
command-line arguments are normally necessary.  Then use the arrow
keys to choose one of the search criteria listed near the bottom of
the terminal, type in an identifier, and hit @key{Enter}.
@command{cscope} will then display the matches in the upper part of
the terminal.  You may use the arrow keys to choose a particular
match; if you then hit @key{Enter}, @command{cscope} will invoke the
default system editor@footnote{This is typically @command{vi}.  To
exit @command{vi}, type @kbd{: q @key{Enter}}.} and position the
cursor on that match.  To start a new search, type @key{Tab}.  To exit
@command{cscope}, type @kbd{Ctrl-d}.

Emacs and some versions of @command{vi} have their own interfaces to
@command{cscope}.  For information on how to use these interface,
visit @url{http://cscope.sourceforge.net, the @command{cscope} home
page}.

@node Version Control
@section Version Control

@include localvcinstructions.texi

@node Virtual Machine
@section Virtual Machine

To ensure uniformity of development platforms, it is strongly recommended
that students develop Pintos on a 32-bit Linux platform.  For students
that don't have access to such a platform, a virtual machine image will
be provided for use with Virtual Box or other virtualization software.
Virtual Box is freely available at @url{http://www.virtualbox.org}.

More details will be coming soon...

@localdevelopmenttools{}

